What
is some of your personal background with trains? I
never worked for a railroad, but I've been
interested in railroads, so I would have to know
what a plane was. As a small child, I could go out in
my front yard and see several railroads about a
block and a half away from where I lived. So I just
grew up waving at the great engineer. And I have
never lost my interest. I'm interested in various
facets of railroad history, but not exclusively
history. I'm interested in the current
activities and the future of the industry.
photographing
trains, doing research on history. I have written
several articles on history. You're a member of
the National Railway Historical Society? That is
correct. What is this organization? The National
Railway Historical Society is a nationwide group
of people who investigate railways. The people in
the society are interested in all facets of it.
Some are interested in diesel, some are
interested in steam locomotives, and others are
passionate friends of electric and urban
railways. But we all have a common interest in
railroads. So we all want this large society,
which has a hundred and so many chapters in
different cities throughout the United States.
And Houston has one, too. Houston has one, too,
that's correct. How large is the chapter in
Houston? The chapter has approximately one and a
half members. Are they all active members? I would
say about half of them are active. Okay. What are
some of the activities that you do? The Gulf Coast
Chapter has our own several river parks. We have
the Good Cheer, which is the Kansas City Southern,
or the Palma King City Southern Lounge, our
population park. We have the Verde Valley, which
is the Farmer's Center Park. We have a sleeping
car. We have a chair car, which is a former Texas
Sub-Civic, 1141. We have a baggage RPO car, which
is a former Santa Fe 3401. We have a baggage car,
which LeBron McDonald donated to us, which he
recently spoke to me about in Seattle. We recently
acquired
a wooden boot from an individual that formerly
belonged to the Compton Railway. And a few months
ago, we obtained a horse car in the same place. How
did you describe that? A horse car. At one time,
horses were shipped by rail. So I bid race horses
for Compton. A special railway passenger car set
up these horses. The exterior is generally like a
large
baggage car, but they have indoors. They carry
horses, and they have individual stalls for the
animals and facilities for the hay. They feed and
kill the animals as well as for the caretakers as
well. I see, okay. Well, about what era are these
cars from? The equipment that we have dates from
about 1915. the baggage car and the most recent one
was the 1940s. Okay, so I guess that around 1920 was
the height of the passenger service in America.
The height of passenger service was in the 20s
before automobiles became very popular.
Everybody had one in his garage before the roads
really improved. They were probably the peak
number of passenger trains operating during the
1920s. What were the main lines Did they just go
across the country, or were they basically
interstate? Well, there were a number of
transcontinental lines. Houston was on the slow
Pacific transcontinental route, known as the
Sunset Route, which ran through New Orleans and
Los Angeles. We were also on the New York City
route, which made Houston the Midwest, the San
Luis, the Burlington. through that's connected
to Colorado. Again,
the Midwest area. The KD basically had local
services. But in addition to these through
routes, there were a number of local. There used to
be a rail car that went from Houston to the Port. It
was a lot of service to Galveston.
before they improved highways and roads, really
went after the gallows
business. They really competed with each other,
and they were really righteous here to get to
Gallows. They were the quickest. There were a lot
of branches in East Texas that had either what we
call gas-electric cars, which are one-car
trains, or even next trains. Just a
. And throughout West Texas, Midwest, there were a
lot of these little branch lines. The rail
passenger service only connected large cities
with large cities. It connected small-town
America with large cities and small-town America
with small-town America. People would ride at one
or two stations down the line to get into railways.
How would you describe some of the services
offered? Did most people spend the night on the
train? Did they have dining cars?
At the height of passenger service, I would think
that, I believe that most of the people rode the
local, the daytime local trains. People who had
more affluence rode the main trains of the day.
Cheap,
you know, 20th century men did. The sons of men did
at that time. These trains had all sorts of
amenities. They had sleeping cars. They had
dining cars, house cars. They had barber shops.
There were libraries that were in the trains. So
they really were a rolling resource. But we also
need to remember that we, today, may not think of
them to be very comfortable, since they didn't
have air conditioning on the way to the crew of the
equipment. They had open windows, and they
deterred the singers and the co-workers from
reporting to the train. These were basically
steam engines at that time? They were basically
steam locomotives at that time. There were a few
railroads in use that were electrified.
Houston had a local commuter system downtown.
Streetcars? Streetcars. When did they phase out?
They began disappearing in the late 20s and early
30s, and the last streetcar ran in 1940. One of the
problems was that. West Street cars, these ones
growing, cost them much to lighten the track. It
was so much quicker to extend the bus lines out.
Plus, once the streetcar company converted the
buses, they no longer had to pay them anything for
the streets, which they did when they had rails in
the street. So they had all sorts of incentives to
do away with the streetcar and replace them with
buses. Well, what were the main cities that were
served by the cross-country lines? Well, there
were certain gateway cities, Chicago, St. Louis,
Memphis, New Orleans. Trains normally did not run
through these cities. For example, you would have
New York and Chicago connected with a train. And
once you got to Chicago, you could change trains
and get on. If you were going to Los Angeles, you
could get on the Santa Fe, go up to Los Angeles. Or if
you were going to the city northwest, you could
change to the Burlington and go out to the Twin
Cities. They were basically through trains from
Chicago, say, to places like Seattle, Los
Angeles, San Francisco, that you could travel
without change. But you always had to change in
Chicago, in St. Louis, in Memphis, in New Orleans.
There were, on occasion, through cars that went
through these cities. But by and large, they were
few and far between. Well, I imagine that the train
rides across country were very popular and
probably the only mode of transportation across
the country. That's true. As I said, the roads were
not improved, not only up there, but long on the
trip of endurance. The airlines were just getting
started, and they were fine. You would hear it when
you grew up in a single-engine airplane. But to
travel at all across country, you went by rail.
Okay. What were the typical people that were on the
trains at East Town? Were they the businessmen, or
were they families traveling?
Well, they really were a cross-section of the
population. They had business travel. They had
the very affluent business travel. Some people
owned their own cars at that time, and they would
attach them to the planes and travel across the
country. There was traveling salesmen there who
used trains to go from city to city with all their
wares. people going on vacations. The railroads
really helped promote travel and tourism in the
United States. They helped promote the National
Park. I won't give any credit for the start of the
National Park, but there were areas of the country
like Yellowstone, which the railroads really
promoted. It got other people interested in the
great national heritage. What was the public
attitude towards trains? Did people see them as a
thing of the future or just a fad? Well, in the 20s,
railroads were an old, established industry. It
started in the United States in the 1920s. They'd
been around for 90-plus years.
And they were a big business, and they were very
noticeable. Everybody had to use trains. But they
had a problem. They had a run-in with somebody who
worked for the railroad company. Everybody at
that time knew someone who worked for the
railroad. They were probably the largest
employers in most of the cities across the
country. How would you contrast that with the late
50s and the 60s? All right. By the late 50s, we
talked about the depression and the war. And a lot
of things have changed. We have an interstate
system, the highway system being developed. The
airline industry has come of age. We've gone from
the single-engine prop planes to the
seven-engine DC-8s. And people were more
interested in flexibility. They didn't want to be
tied to the railroad schedule. When you took the
train, you had to go in the train room. You hopped in
the elevator. You could go when you wanted to go.
You could stop when you wanted to go, when you
didn't want to stop. like any size that you wanted.
Oh, a matter of convenience. A matter of
convenience.
How about the prices? Is that comparable to an
automobile trip across the country, or was it
higher? Well, that's another thing. If a family
was traveling across the country in an
automobile, it didn't cost any more to travel in
the car than if you put four people in there and put
one person in the car. Obviously, the food was a
little more, and your hotel may cost you a little
more. The travel didn't cost you anything.
Railroad train you had to buy a ticket for
everybody. Even with so-called family fairs,
where one person would pay for a fare, and then the
wife would go for a fare, and the children would go
for a partial fare, they still would cost them much
more than driving. What role did the trains play in
World War II? During World War II, the railroads
were very important. In fact, they held most of the
intercity passengers. And most of the troops that
moved to the United States moved by mail. In the
time between, it was very crowded. It was very
difficult to get a seat, very difficult to get a
filming space. The military, the government had
first choice of all the accommodation.
But with people having money in the home front
again, after the Depression, people had money to
spend. They did do a little personal travel, even
during the war. between
1936 and 1966 say what were some of the
improvements in the rail system all right
beginning in the early 30s the railroad began
converting First of all, the dining cars, and then
the sleeping cars, and the more modern chair cars
into air conditioning equipment. That was
probably the biggest innovation that made travel
comfortable. Keep the windows closed, didn't
have the dust, didn't have to bother with an open
window. At the same time, the new technologies
were coming into play. The digital locomotive
appeared on the scene. forward-thinking people
began developing lightweight trucks, the
Pacific Railroad for one, the Burlington for
another. It's a lightweight train. A lightweight
train makes use of modern stainless steel and
other lighter-weight steels, which have high
strength. They probably weighed about
two-thirds that of an older conventional type of
comparable type piece of equipment. What were
those made of? Those were made of steel from about
1912 on. Before that, they were mostly wood. They
were steel underframes. By the 30s, most of the
older wooden equipment had been scrapped and
smoked to steel. What about the advances in
competing industries at this time? The air
service? The air service in Peru, quite a bit. The
jet airplane really made their travel. It was
relatively quiet and comfortable compared to the
piston airplanes, and they were quick. A person
could make a business trip almost cross-country,
transact business, and by stretch you could be
back home that evening. But a two-day trip out to
the coast and back with, then the realm of
possibility, whether you went by rail or it would
take you a week to get there and back. So the
business travel disordered the railways fairly
quickly when the jet airplanes came in. And when
business travel disordered, that meant a lot of
the first-class passengers, so the first class,
in this case, being the sleeping car passengers.
So the sleeping car business was the first part of
the rail passenger service that really
saw the effect of the airlines. What was the role of
the black American? In the 1960s, it was basically
when the civil rights movement took all its
strength. And how are blacks treated as employees
and as passengers? All right. We have some
separate country on the Old South and the North and
the West. The Old South, including Texas, where
the Jim Crow laws were quite separate. cars or
accommodations for the black passengers and the
white passengers. In most cases, this meant a
separate coach or a sectioned coach where the
blacks were in one half of the car and the whites in
the other half. As far as sleeping cars were
concerned, blacks were allowed into sleeping
cars. But as a matter of course, very few had enough
money to travel in sleeping cars, so they were up in
the segregated coaches. As far as employees were
going, the block employees were kept in the lower
rungs of the employee hierarchy. For example,
they were never in locomotives in the air, but they
were frequently locomotified, and that's as far
as they could look to aspire. They could become
porters on a small passenger train, but they
couldn't become break-ins and conductors. Were
they kicks in the dining cars? They were kicks in
the dining cars. They were waiters in the dining
cars. By and large, the speaking car porters were
all black. Okay. But the speaking car conductors
were all white. Were the baggage handlers
employed by the individual lines? The baggage
handlers were employed by the individual
railroads. Okay. Were they black, too? Yes, they
were black baggage handlers. Okay. Do the blacks
tend to ride those trains often? Blacks were a very
good sign to El Dorado. They stuck with it longer
than most of the white population. I think it's a
matter of the economics. They didn't have cars or
they didn't have... They tend on to take them from
Atlanta to New York or something. They were
passionate things. What's the difference
in the black situation in the south and in the north
as opposed to the Washington state? The
accommodations were great. In the north? In the
north, they were not. I see. Even in the south, the
stations had different ways to get to places. But
not in the north? Not in the north. Okay. What was
the public attitude in the mid-'60s and
early-'70s as rail travel declined? Well, most of
them didn't care less, so they didn't take the
train. But there was a handful of people And some of
them didn't travel very often either, I must
admit. It was protest every time I was at a road
point to take a train off. There was labor union
that didn't want to take trains off, so that
reduced the amount of employment available for
their people. And all the small town mayors didn't
want to take the trains off, even though their
people may not use the trains. In fact, they had a
train coming through town for the matter of a local
price. Did it help increase tourism also? In some
areas it was. It did increase tourism, but the
tourist planes really have continued to run. The
Rio Grande Railroad only joined in last year. They
ran their own private passenger plane from 1971 to
1983, and it ran for almost every trip. But even at
that level, they lost money on it. Let's talk about
Amtrak for a minute, then, since you mentioned it.
What is Amtrak? Amtrak is a public corporation set
up by the U.S. Congress, the National Railroad
Passion Corporation, to operate the railroad
passion trains in the United States. In the late
1960s, a lot of the trains disappeared and a lot of
the trains that were remaining were down to a strip
of coaches only, maybe one coach and a man full of
baggage cars, and they made all the stops, and
people had to wait on the baggage express.
And the Amtrak was set up or organized to be a
nationwide passenger train network.
The railroads had the option of joining or not
joining Amtrak. If they joined Amtrak, they had to
buy into the corporation, which was I don't
remember the exact figure, but it was so many years
past the deficit that they had to incur a huge
amount of money that they had to pay to join. Once
they joined Amtrak, they were relieved of any
obligation to run the passenger service. Three
railroads, or actually four railroads opted not
to join Amtrak. One of them was the southern, one of
them was the Rio Grande, as I mentioned. Rock
Island. Rock Island was the third one, because
they really didn't have the money to join. And the
fourth one was the Georgia Railroad, which only
ran a mixed freight on its system. Oh, okay. Well,
what were the circumstances leading up to that?
Was it basically the economy? It wasn't the
economy as such. It was the fact that, as I say,
these competing modes of transportation,
primarily the private automobile, but to a large
extent the jet aircraft, had taken most of the
passengers away from the railroads. A lot of
people say the railroads didn't thrive, but I
disagree with that. After the Second World War,
the railroads re-equipped all their big trains,
and they were buying new types of equipment up
until the mid and late 50s, which told me they were
fine. At that time, a piece of equipment would cost
$100,000 to $300,000 a car, and they were spending
millions and millions and millions of dollars to
re-equip their trains, which was pithy. And they
really did. And there were a number of trained even
in 1971. They're still all spit and polish. But
there were also a number that said, we're losing
too much money on this. And the way we minimize our
loss is to do away with some dining car service. We
do away with car service. And we just run this train
back and forth. I coach on it. Did Amtrak reinstate
the dining car service? No. When Amtrak came into
effect on May 1, 1971, Actually, about two-thirds
of the fashion trains in the United States would
just continue that day. But Amtrak didn't want to
take them over because they were losing too much
money. And that's one thing the railroads have
complained about federally, is the fact that they
had to buy into Amtrak. The various regulatory
commissions would not let them take off the trains
they wanted to take off. And yet Amtrak, being a
national corporation, they became an operating
company for the passenger service, discontinued
virtually every train, but the railroad one
discontinued. What happened to the employees
that were working for the trains that were
discontinued? Well, by and large, most, all of us
were railroad employees, and some of them went
with Amtrak. the sleeping car people, the dining
car people, the ticket office personnel, and so
forth, had this option of either continuing to
work for the railroad or sign up for landfills. And
in some cases, they continued to work for the
railroad, and the railroad would build landfills
for their salaries. But with all the trains that
discontinued, the railroad worked on a strict
seniority system, so it was bumping down the line,
so there weren't enough work for them. for the last
engineer on the seniority roster, and he didn't
get to work. So the same thing happened elsewhere.
They unfortunately allowed it. Trains that were
taken off, and a lot of railroads that took off
trains or train tracks, especially in the dining
car personnel. And I think they made certain
decisions. There was a big
discrimination set up recently, I think, in the
film from Northern about a lot of people were
offered relatively low-status jobs.
Unfortunately, they really weren't qualified to
do much else. But the 1970s and 80s would be a little
different. The 1950s and 60s would be looking at
how people treated. Well, what was the...
What happened to the lines that had both passenger
and freight service? Did they just replace the
passenger service that was now gone with their
freight service? Well, there are only one or two
lines in the United States where there's more
passenger and freight service. And these trains
that were discontinued when Amtrak took over,
they just were off the railroad, and the railroad
kept this line for freight service. There's been a
lot of changes since that. We've had the Rock
Island bankruptcy and this dismemberment. We've
had the Milwaukee railroad abandoned, all this
western lines, and a couple other railroads that
were abandoned, big pieces. So there's been,
we've had a, shake you out is not the right word, but
a rationalization of the railroad system in the
United States in the last 20 years. And so the
railroads that are left are much stronger because
the traffic that used to move over these marginal
lines are now abandoned, are now moving over the
remaining railroads. Plus, with the Stigers Act,
you know, earlier when I said these railroad
freight rates are going to be wet-dated in the last
several years. Now the railroads, after being
completely regulated in the right since the
1880s, For the first time, we're able to go out and
set rates to get track business to be competitive
with truck lines, barge lines, and so on. And they
have gathered a lot of traffic back on their lines.
And I have been impressed myself. There are a lot of
people that are older, I mean, we're older than you
think. Not my age. Who haven't changed over,
but... The railroad department has a lot of bright
young people in recent years. They've become very
innovative in their way of traffic. They've
captured a lot of the business back that they used
to have in most of the trucks. They hope to get more
coverage back. Things such as land bridges, the
road railer service that we had back in the spring.
A road railer is a combination of a highway
trailer, railroad freight car. It has rubber
tires for using on the highways and has small
railroad wheels, which we put down on some track
and had a couple together, and it's dedicated
trains of road railers. And all you have to do when
you get to a town or you need to cut out a trailer to
take that one off the train and it's ready to go, it
would be a shipper or it was, of course, I practice,
it doesn't have to be on the railroad. I see.
Another recent innovation we've had here in
Houston, between Houston and Dallas, is what
DeSoto City calls its unofficial sprint trains.
This is a piggyback train or container train that
handles only 15 cars or 30 trailers. It runs
overnight between Houston and Dallas. But for the
two-man crew, the same two people run the entire
run through eastern Dallas. Now, a normal freight
train run through eastern Dallas requires three
crews because of the old seniority districts.
These two people now take 30 trailers back and
forth through eastern Dallas. Whatever it takes.
Before the railroad in the union made this route,
it would have previously taken 15 people to handle
the same amount of traffic. Okay, hold on, I'll
switch this over.